---
layout: post
title: "Recreational Runners and Cadence"
date: 2019-08-13
description:
image: /assets/images/Cadence.jpg
author: Nicolaas van Dijk
tags:
---
Recreational runners may be interested in changing their running form as a way to run faster/longer or reduce injury risk. A simple way to do this is by adjusting the runner’s cadence (steps/min).  Rather than focusing on specific joint angles and forces, runners can use Spotify or a metronome app to cue the correct step pattern, striking the ground with each beat. [4] Some cadence recommendations are: 

* optimal performance: [180-200 steps/min](https://us.humankinetics.com/products/daniels-running-formula-4th-edition)
* optimal metabolic efficiency: [168-180 steps/min](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29059198/)
* reduced incidence of shin pain: [>173 steps]/min(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26818150/)

*These are general recommendations and do not account for speed. It is best to measure cadence at a controlled speed and make any adjustments at this controlled speed.*

So how can a recreational runner evaluate their goals and incorporate changes in cadence? It may be best to consider other variables before adjusting cadence:

* **Metabolic Efficiency:** If a runner is feeling fatigued after 1 mile, the runner may just need more practice at longer distances. The runner’s metabolic capacity is low, and increasing the demand on this system will cause the greatest changes. Adjusting cadence in this situation will likely not make much of a difference.

* **Musculoskeletal Injury:** For many common running injuries, strength training can be beneficial. The body experiences repetitive forces when running, and strong hips and core can help protect the body. Based on the location of the injury, other strengthening exercises may be helpful as well. 

* **Workload Progression:** Increases in workload may also be an issue. Novice runners may not understand their limits yet, and drastic increases of 4-5 miles per run may be too much. Though everyone is different, it is generally recommend to keep mileage increases at 10% per week or less. The increases can be modified based on how the runner is feeling as well. 

* **Cadence:** After the three variables above are examined, it may make sense to consider running cadence. More research is needed on this topic, but initial studies have shown that runners may benefit from changes in cadence. Since running mechanics are ingrained from childhood, drastic changes may be risky and unsustainable. It is recommended that runners change their cadence by no more than [5% at once.](https://www.runnersworld.com/training/a20808486/how-to-boost-your-cadence/) The runner should then evaluate this new cadence over a few weeks to months. If still not meeting their goals, the runner could work with a coach/therapist to receive more support. 

As a side note, nutrition and sleep are important factors when evaluating running performance. 

